title: about this book
type: about
order: 0
---

Asynchronous code is something the human brain never seems quite able to under- stand. Its behavior is, at best, difficult to synthesize and, at worst, completely nonde- terministic.

We, as programmers, have been to the dark side and seen what happens when code is written with a series of timeouts and callbacks. We’ve tried to keep up with all the possible outcomes and implications of a block of code where asynchronous execu- tion is involved. We’ve handled new failure cases because we now have to face cases where our code executes out of order. And we’ve seen the type of chaos that nested callbacks and global state bring to code that can execute out of order.

Moreover, the amount of data that we’re processing these days, both on the client side and on the server side, means that we can’t spend our time sweating the small stuff. We shouldn’t reinvent the wheel every time we have data coming over the wire. And the paradigm that we use should include the necessary constructs for free so that we can simply layer our business logic on top.

Reactive programming, and RxJS in particular, gives us the tools to build pipelines to move our data through without worrying about the boilerplate underneath. And it does so using concepts distilled from functional programming to give us clean, read- able syntax that will be useful six months from now.

Road map

This book has 10 chapters split over three parts that will take you from a basic intro- duction to RxJS and the functional concepts underlying it all the way to more- advanced practical examples of using RxJS in the real world.

Part 1 is all about getting your feet wet with reactive programming. We know that, for many readers, this is a new topic, but fortunately, if you’ve been using JavaScript for any amount of time, chances are you’ve already been exposed to some of the con- cepts that RxJS uses:

 Chapter 1 introduces the idea of thinking reactively. We compare asynchronous versus synchronous paradigms and point out where existing patterns fall short. This chapter explains why you need reactive programming and how it fits in with your existing models of computing.

 Chapter 2 introduces the primitives of RxJS: the Observable and the Observer.

We look at RxJS’s data-driven model and how the consistent computational model of streams allows you to see all data sources as Observables.

 Chapter 3 opens the RxJS toolbox to look at the operators that make building functional pipelines possible. Here, you’ll see how streams are built and expanded through the use of these operators.

 Chapter 4 adds time as a new layer of complexity for building pipelines. We examine how time can be recorded and even manipulated by RxJS operators.

Part 2 zeroes in on more-practical aspects of RxJS, such as nesting and combining multiple streams and handling exceptions in Rx:

 Chapter 5 looks at nesting Observables and the functional technique of flatten- ing streams. This chapter walks through the process of converting multiple streams into a single stream.  Chapter 6 covers combining the output of streams to build unions or intersec- tions out of their respective events. In particular, this chapter looks at a few of the possibilities when combining the outputs of multiple observables.  Chapter 7 is all about exceptions—or, more specifically, how to handle them in a stream without having messy boilerplate logic everywhere. This chapter starts with a foundation in functional error handling through a Try object and builds up to an understanding of how exceptions can be handled gracefully in an Observable.

Part 3 is about the more complex tasks in RxJS. In this section, we look at practical examples of handling the temperature of Observables and unit testing with virtual time, and finally we put together all we’ve discussed to build a reactive application by integrating RxJS with other frameworks. Note: we decided to wait until chapter 8 to discuss Subjects because we think they’re often a beginner’s crutch that allows you to use patterns that are more familiar to you, while seemingly “Rx-ified.” Although this isn’t wrong, our view is that this isn’t in following with the spirit of Rx and it tends to rob developers of many of the benefits of using RxJS. Thus, we focus first and primar- ily on Observables and Observers, in order to show the multitude of solutions avail- able before you resort to using Subjects.

Chapter 8 explores how to manage the temperature of Observables. This involves not just a discussion about whether certain data sources are hot or cold but also how you can change the temperature of such data sources to fit your needs.

 Chapter 9 handles reactive testing. We cover topics that are important for test- ing your Observables and address techniques for building modular and test- able applications. Finally, we show how you can control the flow of time explicitly while testing, to avoid making tests dependent on real-world time.

 Chapter 10 puts RxJS to use in the real world by integrating it into a functional banking application with React and Redux. This app is both modular and reac- tive, and we show how you can easily test and extend this application.

Finally, there are two appendixes at the end of the book:

 Appendix A, “Installation of libraries used in this book” Our goal was to use external libraries only as necessary and helpful, while also being as inclusive as possible. So, for instance, we don’t use TypeScript, because it’s still a sore spot for many developers, with ongoing transpiler wars (with PureScript, CoffeeScript, Dart, or Flow + JavaScript, and others). Eliminating the need to explain TypeScript and its many evolving language features—or worse, assuming all our readers know it—allowed us to focus on the meat of RxJS and avoid alienating developers who haven’t, can’t, or don’t want to join the transpiler bandwagon. Along the same lines, we wanted to go with the sim- plest route of installation, so we decided not to include the install for other frameworks, even those commonly associated with RxJS. Most frameworks have several steps for installing, and likely those steps will have changed by the time of publication. So we leave it to the library maintainers and Stack Overflow for troubleshooting RxJS integrations with your favorite framework.

 Appendix B, “Choosing an operator” This is a list of all the operators that we use in the book. There are plenty more operators, but there is not one standard set that everyone agrees on, and the list is still growing and changing. Purists may wish we included fewer operators, whereas kitchen-sinkers will want operators for a use case they came up with for a pet project no one else may ever see. We decided it would be most helpful if we stuck to the operators that we show you how to use throughout the book, so you can be assured that you’ll know how to put all operators on our list to work. A more complete list of operators can be found at http://reactivex.io/rxjs/ manual/overview.html#choose-an-operator.

Who should read this book

RxJS in Action is for JavaScript developers who are aware of the current asynchronous challenges facing modern applications. We expect that, for beginners, this book will be quite the crash course because we assume that the reader is already familiar with JavaScript syntax and conventions.

Intermediate developers improve their development chops by adding a new set of tools to their JavaScript toolkit. Reactive programming standardizes the push-based event model to allow the consolidation of many of the familiar patterns of event emis- sion under one roof. Advanced developers or developers who are coming from Rx in other languages will benefit from learning some of the gotchas and pitfalls involved in using RxJS as well as understanding some of the common patterns for using RxJS in practice. Also, although this book covers some functional concepts, it shouldn’t be considered an introduction to functional programming. For a better resource on that, see Functional Programming in JavaScript (Manning, 2016).

How to use this book

For your best reading experience, it’s important to understand that the first three chapters will be new for some readers but review for others. We had to strike a balance between addressing readers who need a more gentle introduction to what is in some ways a large paradigm shift and those who are already “thinking in streams” and com- ing to this book strictly to learn the RxJS approach. We erred on the side of providing more introduction, and we encourage more-advanced readers to skip ahead to the topics they’re ready to learn.

So our recommendations for how to use this book depend on who you are. If you’re a beginner or intermediate developer or are just curious about the founda- tional aspects that led to the development of RxJS, start with chapter 1. If you’re a strong programmer already familiar with the reactive paradigm, you can skim chap- ters 1 and 2 and then jump in at chapter 3, where we really start diving into code sam- ples with RxJS. More-advanced developers, those who are strong JavaScript developers with functional backgrounds or who are coming from Rx in a different language, can probably do a quick review of chapter 3 for JavaScript-specific fundamentals and then start reading in earnest with chapter 4.

Examples and source code

The code examples in this book use ECMAScript 6 JavaScript (aka ES6, aka ES2015), which run equally well on either the server side, aka Node.js, or in the browser. Some examples show network I/O operations or browser DOM APIs but don’t include any remarks about browser incompatibilities, nor do we use any browser-specific Java- Script. We assume a basic level of competence with HTML pages and the console. During the course of our examples, this book makes use of third-party libraries like Ramda.js and PouchDB. You can find the documentation and installation information for these libraries in appendix A. This book contains extensive code listings that showcase reactive patterns and compare promises and callbacks to their Rx counter- parts. You can find all the code samples at the publisher’s website, www.man- ning.com/books/rxjs-in-action, and on GitHub, https://github.com/RxJSinAction/.

The sample code project and the final banking application project are both available under the root GitHub at https://github.com/RxJSinAction/rxjs-in-action and https://github.com/RxJSinAction/banking-in-action, respectively. You can find instal- lation details for both projects in appendix A.

Author Online

Purchase of RxJS in Action includes free access to a private web forum run by Manning Publications where you can make comments about the book, ask technical questions, and receive help from the authors and from other users. To access the forum and sub- scribe to it, point your web browser to www.manning.com/books/rxjs-in-action. This page provides information on how to get on the forum once you are registered, what kind of help is available, and the rules of conduct on the forum.

Manning’s commitment to our readers is to provide a venue where a meaningful dialog between individual readers and between readers and authors can take place. It is not a commitment to any specific amount of participation on the part of the authors, whose contribution to the Author Online forum remains voluntary (and unpaid). We suggest you try asking them some challenging questions lest their inter- est stray! The Author Online forum and the archives of previous discussions will be accessible from the publisher’s website as long as the book is in print.
