title: acknowledgments
type: about
order: 0
---

Writing a book is no simple task. It isn’t a straightforward data dump of knowledge onto paper (or e-ink). Building a book that’s accurate, well paced, and sufficiently dif- ficult yet not overly abstract takes many people working through the countless revi- sions to bring you a book like the one you’re reading now.

The staff at Manning were instrumental in getting this book from a loosely related set of lessons into a quality resource of learning material. Special thanks to Mike Ste- phens and Erin Twohey for originally approaching me about writing a book about RxJS; to Frances Lefkowitz for being the best editor out there and herding the cats otherwise known as us authors through to the finish line; to Bert Bates for never set- tling for less, passing on his wisdom on teaching technical topics, and always trying to help elevate us as writers; and to everyone on the editorial and production teams, including Kevin Sullivan, Linda Recktenwald, Dottie Marsico, Katie Tennant, and all the other people who worked behind the scenes.

We owe a huge thanks to Aleksandar Dragosavljevic and his amazing team of technical peer reviewers—Álvaro Falquina, Bachir Chihani, Carlos Curotto, Clin- ton Campbell, Corinna Cohn, Damian Esteban, James Anaipakos, Kamal Raj, Mat- teo Gildone, Osama Khan, Rod Monk, Sai Ram Kota, Thomas Peklak, Tim Thornton, and Zachary Lysobey—and, of course, all the wonderful insights and suggestions from the forum contributors.

For the technical side of things, we’d like to thank Dean Iverson for being a fan- tastic technical editor, whose attention to detail was frankly incredible. Also, we’d like to thank Cody Sand for his quick and thorough edits; he was really the best technical proofer one could ask for with tight deadlines. In addition, we’d like to especially thank Ben Lesh for writing the foreword to the book.

FROM PAUL: I would like to thank foremost my family—mother, father, brothers, and all the aunts, uncles, and grandparents who inspired me to grow up reading, writing, and playing with computers. Also, I thank my friends for supporting me through this long process and not being too disappointed when I had to choose writing over you. And finally, I thank my coworkers for being willing guinea pigs as I learned how to teach this topic. And to everyone who asked what the book was about and followed up by asking what JavaScript was—seriously, love you guys — thank you.

FROM LUIS: I would like to thank my wife for being my inspiration and my family for always supporting me, pushing me to become better every day, and not questioning why I decided to do this all over again ; also, my friends and colleagues at work for your support in purchasing early releases of the chapters.

Finally, we both would like to thank the JavaScript community at large for adopt- ing RxJS through this book and giving us feedback.
